- This week, we will introduce you to the basic concepts
in Machine Learning, and show you some example notebooks
using Scikit-learn, a popular
Machine Learning library in Python.
You won't be an expert in Machine Learning after this week,
but you will be able to go through and understand
Machine Learning analysis, the basic ones,
as well as create simple Machine Learning
tasks in Python.
You will build up on this knowledge and know more
about Machine Learning, after taking the Machine Learning
class in this Micro Masters.
So take this week as an appetizer to what's coming later.
Since this week is about Machine Learning, let's start
by defining what that means.
We hear this term a lot these days, used in many contexts,
so it's good to start out with a solid definition of what
Machine Learning means.
By the end of this video, you should be able to explain
what Machine Learning is,
and list three applications of Machine Learning
encountered in everyday life.
Machine learning is a field of study that focuses
on computer systems that can learn from data.
That is, these systems, often called models,
can learn to perform a specific task
by analyzing lots of examples for a particular problem.
For example, a Machine Learning model can learn
to recognize an image of a cat by being shown lots and lots
of images of cats.
This notion of learning from data means that a
Machine Learning model can learn a specific task on its own.
The Machine Learning algorithm is programmed to learn
from the data that there's nothing in the algorithm
or program which directly aims to learn the given task.
In other words, Machine Learning models are not given
the step by step instructions on how to recognize
the image of a cat.
Instead, the model learns on its own what features
are important in determining that a picture
contains a cat from the data that it has analyzed.
Because the model learns to perform this task from data,
it's good to note that the amount and quality of data
available for building the model are important factors
in how well the model learns from the task.
Because Machine Learning models can learn from data,
they can be used to discover hidden patterns and trends
in the data as well.
These trends and patterns lead to valuable insights
into the data, thus the use of Machine Learning
allows for data driven functions to be made
for a particular problem.
So to summarize, the field of Machine Learning
focuses on the study and construction of computer systems
that can learn from data
without being explicitly programmed.
Machine Learning algorithms and techniques are used
to build models to discover hidden patterns and trends
in the data, allowing for data driven decisions to be made.
Machine Learning has been used
in many different applications, many of which
you probably encounter in your everyday life,
perhaps without even realizing it.
One application of Machine Learning that you likely used
this past weekend, or even just today,
is credit card fraud detection.
Every time you use your credit card, the current purchase
is analyzed against your history of credit card transactions
to determine if the current purchase
is a legitimate transaction,
or a potentially fraudulent one.
If the purchase is very different from your past purchases,
such as for a big ticket item in a category
that you never show an interest in, or at the point of sale
location is from another country, then it will be flagged
as a suspicious activity.
In that case, the transaction may be denied or you might
get a phone call from your credit card company to confirm
that the purchase was indeed made by you.
This is a very common use of Machine Learning
that's encountered in everyday life.
Another example application of Machine Learning
encountered in daily life
is a handwritten digit recognition.
When you deposit a handwritten check into an ATM,
a Machine Learning process is used to read the numbers
written on the check to determine the amount
of the deposit.
Handwritten digits are trickier to decipher
than typed digits, due to the many variations
in people's handwriting.
A Machine Learning system can sift
through different variations to find similar patterns
to distinguish a one from a nine, for example.
Recommendations on websites is another example application
of Machine Learning that most people
have experienced firsthand.
After you buy an item on a website, you will often
get a list of related items.
Often, this will be displayed as
customer who bought this item also bought these items,
or, you may also like.
These related items have been associated with the item
you purchased by a Machine Learning model and are now
being shown to you since you may also be interested
in them also.
This is a common application of Machine Learning
used often in sales and marketing.
These were just a few examples among many.
As we have discussed, data science has its roots
and statistics, Machine Learning, artificial intelligence
and computer science among other fields.
So Machine Learning is the part of this field
that encompasses the algorithms and techniques
used to learn from data.
There are a number of other terms we hear in conversations
about Machine Learning.
The term data mining became popular around the time that
the use of databases became commonplace.
So data mining was used to refer to activities related
to finding patterns in databases and data warehouses.
There are some practical data management aspects
to data mining related to accessing data from databases,
but the process of finding patterns in data is similar
to Machine Learning and often uses similar algorithms
and techniques.
Predictive analytics is another term, and it refers
to analyzing data in order to predict future outcomes.
This term is usually used in the business context
to describe activities such as sales forecasting
or predicting the purchase of behavior of a customer.
But again, the techniques used to make these predictions
are the same techniques for Machine Learning.
As we have discussed before, data science is a new term
that's used to describe the process of processing
and analyzing data to extract meaning.
And again, Machine Learning techniques
can also be used here.
Because the term data science became popular
at the same time that big data began appearing,
data science usually refers to extracting meaning
from big data.
So it includes a purchase for collecting, storing
and managing big data, as well as Machine Learning.
To summarize, in this lecture, we've discussed
what Machine Learning is, and how it is being used
in our daily lives.
Machine Learning models learn from data to perform a task
without being explicitly programmed.
They are used to discover patterns and trends in the data,
and allow for data driven decisions to be made
for the problem being studied.
We also discussed in this lecture some examples
of how Machine Learning is being used.
We see from the example applications that Machine Learning
can be applied to many different areas,
and it's practically everywhere.