- In this lesson, we will focus on a category
of machine learning problem called classification.
By the end of this video, you should be able to define
what classification is, discuss whether classification
is supervised or unsupervised,
and describe how binomial classification differs
from multinomial classification.
As we discussed before, classification
is one type of machine learning problem.
In a classification problem, the input data is
presented to the machine learning model,
and the task is to predict the target
corresponding to the input data.
The target is a categorical variable.
So the classification task is to predict
the category or label of the target given the input data.
For example, the classification problem
we discussed before, and illustrated in this image,
is to predict the type of weather.
The target that the model has to predict is the weather.
And the possible values for weather in this case
is sunny, windy, rainy, or cloudy.
The input data can consist of measurements
like temperature, relative humidity, atmospheric pressure,
wind speed, wind direction, et cetera.
So given specific values for temperature, relative humidity,
and all those other measurements, the task for the model
is to predict if the weather will be
sunny, windy, rainy, or cloudy for the day.
This is what the data set might look like
for the weather classification problem.
Each row is a sample with input variables.
Temperature, humidity, and pressure,
and target variable, weather.
Each row has specific values for the input variables
and a corresponding value for the target variable.
The classification task is to predict the value
of the target variable from the values
of the input variables.
Since a target is provided, we have label data,
and so classification is a supervised task.
Recall that in a supervised task, the target,
or design output for each sample is given.
Note that the target variable goes by many names
such as target, label, output,
class variable, category, and class.
A classification problem can be binary,
or multi-class.
With the binary classification, the target variable
has two possible values, for example yes and no.
With multi-class classification, the target variable
has more than two possible values, for example
the target can be short, medium, and tall.
Multi-class classification is also referred to as
multinomial or multi-label classification.
Remember, though, the target is always
a categorical variable in classification.
Some examples of binary classification are
predicting whether it will rain tomorrow or not.
Here, there are only two possible outcomes.
Yes, it will rain tomorrow,
or no, it will not rain tomorrow.
Another example is identifying whether a credit card
transaction is legitimate or fraudulent.
Again, there are only two possible values
for the target, legitimate and fraudulent.
Some examples of multi-class classification
are predicting what the type of product
that a customer will buy.
In this case, the possible values for the target
variables will be product categories, such as
kitchen, electronics, clothes, and things like that.
And there are more than one categories of products.
So, this is a multi-class classification problem.
Another example is categorizing a tweet as
having positive, negative, or neutral sentiment.
Again, the number of possible values
for the target is more than two here, although it's three.
So this is, also a multi-class classification task.
In summary, in classification, the model has to predict
the category corresponding to the input data.
Since the target is provided for each sample,
classification is a supervised task.
The target variable is always categorical in classification.