- There are different categories
of machine learning techniques
for different types of problems.
The main categories we'll discuss
are classification,
regression, cluster analysis and association analysis.
In this video,
we'll go over each of these in detail.
By the end of this video,
you should be able to describe the main categories
of machine learning techniques,
and summarize how supervised learning
differs from unsupervised learning.
In classification,
the goal is to predict the category of the input data.
As an example of this
is predicting the weather as being sunny,
rainy, windy or cloudy.
The input data in this case
would be sensor data specifying the temperature,
relative humidity, atmospheric pressure,
wind speed, wind direction etc.
The target or what you're trying to predict
would be the different weather categories,
like sunny, windy, rainy and cloudy as we discussed.
The categories to be predicted
are called classifications.
Another example is to classify a tumor
is as benign or malignant.
In this case,
the classification is referred to as binary classification
since there are only two categories
but you can have many categories as well
as the weather prediction problem shown here.
Another example of classification
is to identify hundreds and digits
as we talked about in our last video
as being one of 10 categories, zero to nine.
When your model has to predict a numeric value
instead of a category,
then the task becomes a regression problem.
An example of regression
is to predict the price of a stock.
The stock price is a numeric value,
not a category, so this is a regression task.
It is not a classification task.
If you were to predict
whether the stock price will rise or fall,
then that would be a classification problem
but if you're predicting the actual price of the stock,
then that's a regression problem.
That is the main difference
between classification and regression.
To summarize,
in classification you're predicting a category,
and in regression,
you're predicting a numeric value.
Another regression application
in addition to the stock example here,
is for prediction of the amount of rain for a region.
Recall that in our discussion on classification
we had discussed predicting
if it will rain the next day.
That is predicting between one of the two categories,
rain or not rain.
So, that's a classification problem.
But if we are predicting the amount of rain,
which is a numeric value,
that would be a regression problem.
In cluster analysis,
the goal is to organize similar items
in your dataset into groups.
A very common application of cluster analysis
is referred to as customer segmentation.
This means that you're separating your customer base
into different groups or segments
based on customer types.
For example,
it would be beneficial to segment your customers
into seniors, adults and teenagers.
These groups have likely different likes and dislikes
and have different purchasing behaviors.
When companies segment customers
into different groups like this,
they may be able to provide targeted marketing ads
for each group's particular interests.
Note that cluster analysis
is also referred to as clustering in different contexts.
Next is association analysis.
The goal here is to come up with a set of rules
to capture associations
between items or events.
The rules are used to determine
when items or events occur together.
A common application of association analysis
is known as market basket analysis,
which is used to understand customer purchasing behavior.
For example,
association analysis can reveal
that banking customers
who have
checking or deposit accounts
also tend to be interested in other investment vehicles
such as money market accounts.
This information can be used for cross selling,
so if your financial institution
advertises money market accounts
to your customers with CDs,
they're likely to open such an account.
Other common applications
can be recommendation of similar items
based on purchasing or browsing history of customers.
Finding items that are often purchased together
and offering based on these related items
at the same time to drive sales
of both items would be very beneficial.
Identification of web pages
that are often accessed together
can also provide us
a good basis for association analysis.
One can imagine more efficiently
generating offers
on these related web pages
to create further benefit of this information.
We now looked at the different categories
of machine learning techniques.
They are classification,
regression,
cluster analysis and association analysis.
We've also seen some examples of each category.
For the techniques we've discussed here,
there are two ways of conducting the learning itself.
These categories
are referred to as supervised versus unsupervised learning.
In supervised approaches,
the target, which is what the model is predicting,
is provided.
This is referred to as having labeled data
because the target is labeled for every sample
that you have in your dataset.
Referring back to our example
of predicting the weather category
of sunny, windy, rainy or cloudy,
every sample in the dataset
is labeled as being one of these four categories.
So, the data is labeled
and predicting the weather category
is a supervised task.
In general,
classification and regression
are supervised approaches.
In unsupervised approaches,
on the other hand,
the target that the model is predicting
is unknown or unavailable.
This means that you have unlabeled data,
so you can't train using these labels.
Going back to our cluster analysis example
of segment customers into different groups,
the samples in your data are not labeled
with the correct group.
Instead, the segmentation is performed
using a clustering technique
to group items based on characteristics
of what they have in common.
Thus, the data is unlabeled
and the task of grouping customers
into different segments
is an unsupervised one.
In general, cluster analysis
and association analysis are unsupervised approaches.
In summary,
in this video we looked at different categories
of machine learning techniques
and we discussed classification, regression,
cluster and association analysis
as some of these techniques.
We also defined what unsupervised and supervised approaches
are in machine learning,
and which one of our earlier categories
fit in these two categories.