- Now let's review some of the terminology
related to machine learning.
By the end of this video, you should be able to
describe what the feature is and how it relates to a sample,
name some alternative terms for feature
and summarize how a categorical feature
differs from a numerical feature.
Before we delve into the methods for processing
and analyzing data, let's first start with defining
some of the terms used to describe data,
starting samples and variables.
A sample is an instance or example
of an entity in your data.
This is typically a row in your dataset.
This figure shows part of a dataset of values
related to weather.
Each row is a sample representing weather data
for a particular day.
The table in the figure shows four samples of weather data,
each for a different day.
In this table, each sample has five values associated to it.
These values are different information pieces
about that sample, like the sample date,
minimum temperature, maximum temperature
and rainfall on that date.
We call these different values variables of the sample
and sometimes refer to them as features of the sample.
In fact, there are many names for samples and variables,
some of which we've already used
in some of our previous weeks.
Some other terms for sample that you might hear
in the machine learning context are record, example,
row, instance and observation among many others.
It is good to know that all of these terms mean
the same thing in the machine learning context.
That is, they all refer to a specific example
of an entity in your dataset.
Similarly, there are many names for variables
in addition to feature.
Some other terms for variable are feature, column,
dimension, attribute and field.
All of these terms refer to the same
specific characteristics for each sample in your dataset.
An important point to emphasize about variables is that
they are digital values with a type.
Each variable has a data type associated with it.
The most common data types are numeric and categorical.
There are other data types as well such as string and date
but we will focus on more common data types
of numeric and categorical in the context of data mining.
As the name implies, numeric variables are
variables that take on numbers.
They can be measured and their values can be sorted
in order in some way.
Note that a numeric variable can take on just integer values
or be continuous values.
It can also have just positive numbers,
negative numbers or both.
A variable with labels, names or categories for values
instead of numbers are called categorical variables.
For example, a variable that describes the color of an item,
such as the color of a car, can have values such as red,
silver, blue and black.
These are non-numeric values that describe some quality
or characteristics of an entity.
These values can be thought of as names or labels
that can be sorted into categories,
therefore categorical variables are also referred to as
qualitative variables or nominal variables.
To summarize, a sample is an instance
or example of an entity in your data.
A variable captures specific characteristics of each entity.
So a sample has many variables to describe it.
Data from real applications are often multidimensional,
meaning that there are many dimensions or variables
describing each sample.
Each variable has a data type associated with it
and the most common data types are numeric and categorical.
Note that there are many terms to describe
these data related concepts and you'll likely find that
different references, textbooks and data scientists
use many of these interchangeably.