- In this lesson
we'll talk about regression analysis
and review regression analysis toolkit and scikit-learn.
By the end of this video
you should be able to define what regression is,
explain the difference between regression
and classification
and name some applications of regression.
Before we talk about regression,
let's review classification again.
In a classification problem
the input data is presented to the machine learning model
and the task is to predict the target
corresponding to the input data.
The target is a category called variables,
so the classification task
is to predict the category or the label
of the target given the input data.
The classification examples shown here
is one we have seen before.
The input variables and measurements
such as temperature, relative humidity,
atmospheric pressure,
wind speed and wind direction.
The task for the model
is to predict the weather category
associated with the input data.
The possible values
for the weather category
is sunny,
windy,
rainy or cloudy.
Since we are predicting the category,
this is a classification task.
With that context in mind,
let's now discuss regression.
When the model has to predict a numeric value
instead of a category,
then the task becomes a regression problem.
An example of regression
is to predict the price of a stock.
The stock price is numeric and not a category,
so this is regression task
instead of a classification task.
Note that if you were to predict
not the actual price of the stock
but whether the stock price will go up or go down,
then that would be a classification task.
That is the main difference
between classification and regression.
In classification you're predicting a category
and in regression,
you're predicting a numeric value.
Here are some examples
where a regression can be used.
We can use it for forecasting
the high temperature for the next day,
or estimating the average housing price
for a particular region.
Determining the demand for a new product,
a new book, for example,
based on similar existing products
is also a regression task,
as well as predicting the power usage
for a particular smart grid.
This is what the dataset
might look like for the regression task
of predicting tomorrow's high temperature.
The input variables could be
the high temperature for today,
the low temperature for today and the month,
and the target is the high temperature for tomorrow.
The model has to predict this target value
for each sample.
Recall that in a supervised task,
the target is provided,
while for an unsupervised task,
the target is not available or not known.
Since the target label is provided for each sample,
as a numeric value here,
the regression task is a supervised one
similar to classification.
As with classification,
building a regression model
also involves two phases,
a training phase in which the model is built,
and a testing phase in which the model
is applied to new data
that the model hasn't seen before.
The model is built using training data,
and evaluated on test data.
Similarly, with classification
the goal in building a regression model
is also to have the model perform well
on training data
as well as generalized to new data.
The use of two different datasets
that we have previously discussed,
also applied to regression.
Recall that the two datasets are used as follows,
the training dataset is used to train the model,
that is to adjust the parameters of the model
to learn the input to output mapping.
The test data set is used to evaluate
the performance of the model
on new data or the leftover data.
Something that we haven't discussed yet
but you will hear a lot in your machine-learning class
later on is validation data.
The validation dataset
is used to determine when stopping
training in order to avoid model overfitting.
In summary,
in regression,
the model has to predict a numeric value
corresponding to the input data.
Since the target is provided for each sample,
regression is a supervised task.
The target is always a numerical variable in regression.
Next, we will discuss a specific algorithm
to build a regression model.