- Now that we talked about the basics of Machine Learning,
let's overview a Machine Learning library in Python
called Scikit-learn.
By the end of this video you should be able to identify
key strengths of Scikit-learn, explain why it is a
leading library for Machine Learning,
navigate your way to find the right tool in Scikit-learn,
and search for tutorials that provide problem specific
examples using library functions.
Scikit-learn is an open source library in Python
for end to end Machine Learning.
It builds upon the strength of NumPy, SciPy,
and matplotlib like many other Python libraries.
It is being rapidly developed and improved
by an active community of developers.
For example in May 2017 as we speak, the number of
contributors to Scikit-learn was 846.
When I said end to end Machine Learning, what I mean is
the entire data science process including Machine Learning,
data cleaning, and data transformations.
Scikit-learn supports the whole process by providing
utility functions for data transformations, as well as
a range of data cleaning and preparation functions
that help with many tasks including scaling, normalization,
feature engineering, and missing value handling.
Scikit-learn also provides built-in functions for many
Machine Learning algorithms ready for modeling and analysis.
Although it requires some expertise to use these algorithms
appropriately for the right tasks, there are many resources
online that make the learning curve easier.
Additionally the documentation on the website for
Scikit-learn includes tutorials to get started.
We find those documentation really easy to follow.
For example, the clustering part of the documentation
nicely overviews the available algorithms, their metrics,
scalability, parameters and even potential use cases.
Scikit-learn also includes specialized implementations
for dimensionality reduction algorithms.
Although we won't go into the details of these algorithms
in this course, they'll be handy in your upcoming
Machine Learning course in this MicroMasters.
In Machine Learning we use a number of techniques
to evaluate and select the right model.
You will find a number of methods to help with this as well.
As a summary, Scikit-learn provides an extensive
set of tools for the full Machine Learning process.
Thanks to Python we can combine these tools with
the rest of the data science tools in Python
that we've learned up to now.
This open and extensible Machine Learning library
is vibrantly being developed and documented
by a very active community.
We hope you will enjoy using this library as much as we do.