- Hi, I'm Philip, and I'm an assistant professor
of cognitive science here at UC San Diego.
Now, a lot of my research actually revolves
around studying and building systems for online learning,
very similar to these massive open online courses
that you're taking right now.
And today, I wanna tell you a story
about how I used Python to perform data science
on video watching data from these MOOCs,
these massive online open courses.
And this was published in a paper
at the Learning at Scale Conference in 2014,
which you can check out by looking at the link
at the bottom of the video.
But before I talk about my study,
I wanna first go over a little bit
about why you should use Python for data science.
So, there's a lot of reasons why people say
that Python is great for data science,
and I wanna summarize a lot of what people have been saying
into one phrase, which is that Python has a giant ecosystem
of tools for connecting and working with many sources
of real-world data across lots of domains.
So, this means that by learning Python
in this class you're taking right now,
you're actually very marketable in the job market,
no matter what domain you're working in,
because chances are, there'll be some set of libraries
or tools that can actually work with Python
and connect to the data in your domain
that you can work with and to process the data
and produce reports.
So as an example, I wanna show you a research study I did
that actually is in the domain of online learning.
So, what I did is that I took 862 videos
from popular massive open online courses, from MOOCs,
and I took the log data of how people,
how students actually watched these videos.
So other are over 127 students in my data set,
and there they had over 6.9 million video watching sessions.
So every time a student watched a video,
the log recorded how long they were watching the video for,
which part of the video they were watching, et cetera.
So all this data was in a MongoDB database,
and I used Python with the PyMongo library
to extract the data from MongoDB.
Then I used the NumPy library to analyze this data
using various numerical analysis techniques.
I ran some statistical tests for my research paper
using the SciPy library,
and then I produced graphs for my research paper
using the Matplotlib library.
And I organized all of this analysis in a Jupyter Notebook.
So these libraries, which you should definitely check out,
are very powerful and widely used stacks
for doing data science in Python right now.
So I wanna show you
some of the most salient results from the analysis.
So, this graph shows various bars,
and each kind of column represents a group of videos
by the video length.
So, the first one is videos that are very short,
zero to three minutes,
and then three to six minutes,
six to nine minutes, et cetera.
And the y axis shows, on average, how much time
were people watching these videos for?
And if you actually look, it kind of goes up
around six to nine minutes, and then goes down again,
which means that at six to nine minutes,
those six- to nine-minute videos, people are watching
actually a fair amount, and if you actually look
at the long videos, nine to 12 minutes and 12 to 40 minutes,
these really long videos,
people actually didn't watch that many minutes,
because intuitively, if you have a really long video,
you might zone out after the first few minutes or get bored.
So a second analysis shows this a bit more strikingly.
So this is the same graph as before,
except the y axis now is normalized.
So 1.0 means that somebody watched
the entire length of the video,
and the red bars show that about six to nine minutes,
people are still watching most of the video,
but at nine to 12 minutes or 12 to 40 minutes,
people are watching less than half
or maybe even a quarter of the video.
Again, this shows really strikingly
that short videos, zero to three minutes,
three to six minutes, maybe six- to nine-minute videos,
are good, but any longer,
and people are not gonna watch that long.
So people have taken these results from this paper
I did with colleagues a few years ago
and applied it to their own use of creating movies.
So right now, it's standard practice
for people to make these videos that are MOOCs in MOOCs
that are actually very short, so five minutes or less,
just like this video right here,
because we know the research
that people are actually not gonna watch long videos.
And if you want more help
on learning Python as you're taking this course,
check out this tool called pythontutor.com,
which is an interactive visual tool that I've created
to help people debug Python code and learn Python better.
And I wish you the best of luck
in your journey in learning data science and Python,
and I think it's a really exciting journey.
I'm looking forward
to what you do after you finish this class.