- [Instructor] In this video, we'll be looking at
another famous visualization.
This one was used to depict France's Russian campaign
in 1812.
So by the end of this video,
you should be able to explain why the data visualization
of Napoleon's Russian campaign in 1812
is considered so effective.
Charles Joseph Minard created this figure in 1869.
The title of the figure is, when translated to English,
Figurative Map of the Successive Losses in Men
for the French Army in the Russian Campaign,
1812 through 1813.
Minard was a successful civil engineer in France.
He was considered an early leader
in using visualizations in engineering and statistics.
He is most well-known for creating this figure,
which charted that Russian campaign.
In orange, you have the French Army, as it advanced
from the crossing of the Neman River towards Moscow.
In black, you have the French Army in retreat.
The width of the line depicts the size of the army.
You could zoom in quickly to the Neman River,
where you'll find the army's size
at the start and the end of the campaign.
You can see almost instantly how disastrous
the invasion of Russia was for the French.
They started with around 450,000 troops,
although some estimates are actually higher,
and they ended it with barely 10,000.
So how are those losses suffered?
Let's briefly talk through this campaign
using the figure.
So first, what started all this?
In 1812, Russia, under Czar Alexander the First,
had been blockading British goods as allies of France.
They were blockading British goods
under Napoleon's edict that barred trade with England.
However, the banning of trade with England
was having a disastrous effect on the Russian economy,
so Russia decided to end its participation
in the embargo.
Napoleon, after negotiations with Russia
to restore the embargo failed,
began his campaign to invade Russia in 1812.
The plan was to attack the smaller Russian Army
near the Russian border,
crush it in battle, and end the war.
That was the plan, however the Russian Army
refused to engage in Napoleon's huge army in direct battle.
As the Russian Army fled back to Moscow,
they would destroy the countryside,
causing the French Army to fall short on supplies.
You can see that in the highlighted region
of this figure here.
In addition, Russian Cossacks would perform
small hit and run attacks on the French Army,
both killing troops and also lowering morale.
Without engaging in any battle,
the French Army was suffering huge losses
mostly due to sickness and desertion.
Napoleon finally got the battle he desired
at the village of Borodino outside of Moscow.
The battle was brutal and ultimately France prevailed,
but it did so without the decisive victory desired.
On September 14th, the French Army moved into Moscow,
only to find it deserted
and shortly, much of it was on fire.
Napoleon had expected a Russian surrender
when he entered Moscow,
but he would never receive one.
After waiting a month in Moscow to negotiate surrender,
snow flurries began to fall.
Napoleon realized his army could not
weather the winter in Moscow.
After leaving Moscow, the French Army was attacked
by the Russian Army, which had received reserves
and was now able to actually go on the offensive.
Their presence forced Napoleon to flee
using a northern route, which was problematic
because winter continued to set in.
Moreover, the Russian forces were able
to attack the French Army as they continued to flee.
Conditions during the retreat were terrible.
The troops lacked supplies, they were being attacked
while they were fleeing, and they had to endure
an early and harsh winter.
On this figure are the temperatures
the troops faced during their retreat.
Temperatures were often below zero,
and the army encountered a great deal of snow.
So the time Napoleon's army returned to their start,
it was a tiny fraction of its former strength.
Without the might of his former army,
Napoleon's power in Europe would now come under challenge.
So what makes this visualization so special?
Most notably, it is six types of data
all being visualized, which we've discussed.
We have the latitude and the longitude for the armies.
We have the direction the army was traveling,
the size of the army,
the distance the army traveled,
and the temperature that the army faced
during their retreat.
By encoding all these types of data,
one figure is capable of presenting
the story of how French losses,
French losses during the Russian campaign in 1812.
To conclude, I want to acknowledge
some of the key sources I used
when assembling this video.
Thank you to Jesse Greenspan, The Economist, and PBS
for their excellent articles
on the Russian campaign of 1812.
I encourage you to explore these articles more
if you wish to learn more.