- This lesson will focus on case studies
of exemplar data visualizations.
In this video, we'll focus on a data visualization
which helped the world understand
the true cause of cholera.
So by the end of this video,
you should be able to describe
the role played by data visualization
in understanding how cholera spread.
As background, cholera is a bacterial infection
which can cause severe diarrhea,
possibly leading to death through dehydration.
After exposure to the bacteria,
a person shows symptoms 12 hours to five days later,
and acute cases can kill within hours if untreated.
Unfortunately, cholera is still a danger today,
with millions of cases worldwide
and deaths in the tens to hundreds of thousands.
For those of you who are a bit squeamish,
you may want to skip ahead to the video
where you see the map graphic.
Cholera is particularly dangerous,
as it can easily cause outbreaks
in areas with poor sanitation.
People with cholera have diarrhea,
which contains the bacteria
for up to 10 days after the infection.
If someone ingests that bacteria, they contract the disease.
So if sewage contaminates food or water supplies,
this can cause an outbreak.
Today, we know how cholera is spread
because of a scientist who had a theory
and a terrible outbreak which occurred in 1854 in London.
Now, in London in the 1800s,
sanitation struggled, particularly in poor neighborhoods.
With the rising population
and lack of proper sewage and sanitation guidelines,
many folks lived in terrible conditions.
They often got their water from wells,
but well water was susceptible to contamination.
If they didn't know it was spread through water,
what exactly did they think caused it?
They actually thought it was a combination of
smelling something bad and poor constitution.
The first was what led to doctors wearing masks,
like in this image.
The artwork here actually relates
to doctors trying to avoid the Black Death,
but the same theory was still present in the 1800s.
Bad smells caused disease,
and if you could put some sort of perfume
in the mask with you, you could avoid those smells,
although we know now that this thinking is flawed.
We have the benefit of germ theory.
I suspect back in the past, the origin of this idea
was likely just a mistaking correlation for causation.
Areas where there were people who were ill
or had poor sanitation likely had worse odors.
Since people got sick in areas with poor odors,
they falsely attributed the smell
to the source of the disease.
The second idea was a bit more repugnant.
At the time, the poor tended to suffer
more from the disease.
Not surprising, given what we know now
about how diseases are spread
and the conditions in which they lived at the time.
But at the time, some people believed
poor people were just somehow weaker people,
and by their own weaknesses, were susceptible to disease.
Again, this is mistaking correlation for causation.
However, this time it's combined with bigotry.
So now that you have a decent idea
of what they think caused the disease,
that leads us to John Snow,
who was a scientist living in London in the 19th century.
His background was as an anesthesiologist,
where he'd applied scientific principles
to make the practice far safer for patients.
He'd also published his theory
that cholera was water born in 1849,
but his theory gained little traction.
So John Snow is living in London in 1854,
near where the cholera outbreak occurred.
The outbreak was caused by contaminated water
entering the well sourcing the Broad Street water pump.
After the outbreak, John Snow went door to door
in the vicinity of the outbreak
and followed up with every fatal case
to find out where they lived and where they got their water.
He plotted all these deaths onto a map.
This is the full map.
It's a bit harder to see, but the Broad Street pump
is right there in the middle of all those blocks.
Each of those little rectangular blocks
was a death from cholera.
If we zoom in,
we see that there are a large number of deaths
in the neighborhood around the pump,
and away from the pump, the deaths declined.
By talking with the families of the deceased,
he was able to learn where victims got their water,
and in a perfect example of data science,
the outliers were critical for finding convincing answers.
There was a workhouse or a prison
nearby the Broad Street pump with many inmates
but almost no fatalities.
It turns out the workhouse had its own well
and shipped water in from a different source,
so they weren't using the pump.
There was a brewery nearby, which had also escaped cholera.
Again, they had their own water supply
or they drank the liquor that was produced in the facility,
so they weren't drinking from the pump.
Lastly, there was a woman and her niece
who lived some distance away from the pump
and had died of cholera.
With some investigation, he found out the aunt
had previously lived in the area
and liked the water from the Broad Street pump so much
that she had it delivered to her
and often shared it with her niece.
The combination of this figure
and the gathered data that John Snow had put together
led town officials to shut down the well
by removing its handle.
Despite being skeptical that the pump was the cause,
the number of new infections almost instantly declined
and were quickly stopped.
So even though this outbreak was stemmed
by the action of taking off the handle from the pump,
it took some time before John Snow's ideas
were widely accepted.
One key piece to this puzzle
was provided later by a reverend in the area
named Henry Whitehead.
He had sought out to prove John Snow wrong,
but in the process, he stumbled on the answer
to the mystery of how the pump got contaminated.
A baby had become ill from cholera in a house
near the pump shortly before the outbreak.
The parents had cleaned the diapers for the baby
into a cesspool near the well,
which then seeped into the well, contaminating it.
Another key find related to cholera came some years later
when a German physician, Robert Koch,
isolated the bacteria which causes cholera.
He did that in 1883.
These epidemics and the realization of its cause
led to Europe and the United States
adopting water sanitation.
Snow, for his work, is often regarded
as one of the pioneers of the field of epidemiology.
I would note that well much of the developed world
has access to clean water,
the story of cholera is, sadly, not over,
as my numbers at the start of this video told you.
The World Health Organization has estimated that
almost 80% of people in third-world countries
lack access to clean water supplies,
and in many of those areas,
there's no sewage treatment, either.
Despite our knowing how to prevent cholera,
it remains a global health concern.
To end things on a positive note,
I want to share a picture of me
next to the Broad Street pump in London in 2013.
I was there for a conference and appreciating the science
and the data visualization in the story
around the Broad Street pump.
This was actually one of my first stops of that trip.
I also want to end with a quick plug
for the book The Ghost Map,
the story of London's most terrifying epidemic,
how it changed science, cities, and the modern world,
by Steven Johnson.
Much of my knowledge about this story
came from reading this book,
and when I was teaching the interdisciplinary course
on scientific literacy and disease at Skidmore College,
we used this book as required reading.
So I really can't recommend it enough.