- Now that we know what we mean by data visualization,
let's talk about what makes a visualization useful.
By the end of this video,
you should be able to recognize
the qualities of good data visualization.
You know, there're lots of opinions
about criteria for good data visualization.
By I really like these three put forth by
a leading data scientist visualization educator, Andy Kirk.
Data visualization needs to be
trustworthy, accessible, and elegant.
Let's talk through all three of these in more detail
but, before I do, just a quick word
about Andy Kirk's book
which I've mentioned a few times already.
This book is a great reference
for all things data visualization,
and I highly recommend it
if you wish to dig deeper into this area of study.
By saying a visualization is trustworthy,
we are saying that the data presented is honestly portrayed.
For example,
if you're displaying something in such a way that it implies
a relationship or a trend or a correlation,
there should be evidence for such relationship in the data,
otherwise you're just misleading your audience.
Let's look at a quick example.
Here's a hypothetical figure you might be shown
at a business meeting.
Take a little, and see if you can spot what's wrong with it.
If you noticed the y-axis,
you realize this isn't a surge at all.
The y-axis is zoomed into just a small part of the graph.
We're looking at a roughly 2% increase between Q1 and Q4.
That's hardly surging.
I suspect the author of such a chart
of trying to be dishonest or, at the very least, misleading.
They're trying to convince me of something which isn't true.
Let's just look at all the flaws here.
Surge?
Two percent is a surge?
The title's simply misleading.
We already that the y-axis is being zoomed in on
to exaggerate the growth between Q1 and Q4,
but did you notice how the font size on the y-axis
seems to have been made intentionally small
just so it's harder to read.
Lastly, the fourth quarter's when holidays occur.
I'd expect to see a rise in profits for many industries
during the fourth quarter.
A more honest graph might also plot prior years' profits
to compare against.
So, yikes.
By the time I'm done reading this graph,
I simply do not believe the author anymore.
All credibility's gone.
So let's see how we could've done this better.
Okay, in this figure, we setup the y-axis honestly.
And this actually looks like pretty steady revenue
over each quarter of 2016,
so I fixed the title to reflect that.
If this is the only year for which we have data,
the story might be over,
but, if you have data from prior years,
we should plot them to see how things look.
Supposing we have prior year data,
if I plot last year's quarterly revenue,
I see that there was a surge in profits in 2015
which is absent in 2016.
In 2015, the company had a 12% boost between Q1 and Q4
which is less than 2% in 2015.
We could've titled this in a different ways.
We could've just said that our revenue was steady in 2016,
and that's not misleading.
Or we could focus in on the fact
that we didn't see a surge in Q4.
Either way, we want to dive into the data more
to figure out why we didn't see the revenue boost
in Q4 of 2016
that we saw in Q4 of 2015.
And we do that prior to presenting these results,
so we have good answers of why this happened.
So after fixing the presentation
and pulling in more hypothetical data,
we've actually reversed our initial misleading conclusion.
So there are two key takeaways here
which help echo some of the messages you heard in week one.
First, you need to take trust seriously.
People who are looking at your results
are trusting you not to doctor the data
or misrepresent results.
They want to take action based on your findings.
To make this even more concrete,
as a scientist, I often review papers for publication.
If I find one
seemingly intentionally misleading claim or figure,
I call into doubt everything the author said.
And if someone similarly tries to mislead you
with poor data visualizations,
you shouldn't trust them either.
The second point is just a reminder
that honesty isn't limited to the visualization stage.
Honesty has to be everywhere in data science.
And this can be hard at times.
You may have your own beliefs
about what you'll find in the data.
If fact, we could have an entire separate course
on how to combat human psychological bias.
But for now, it suffices to say
that you should recognize the biases you have
before you look at the data
and do your best to have the data itself,
not your bias, drive your inquiry.
Our second key principle is accessibility.
Accessibility to me is about focusing on your audience
and their ability to use your visualization.
Let me give you another example.
This is a hypothetical example
from one of my areas of research, computer architecture.
This graph could be useless or great
depending on your audience.
For a computer architect,
the y-axis is reporting instructions for cycle, or IPC,
which is one of three major components of execution time,
and the inverse of execution time
is often used a measure of performance.
We're reporting average IPC
for an accepted benchmark suite, SPEC 2006,
which is used by researchers in computer architecture.
If these processor models were real,
it's possible I'd know a lot about them
and know how they differ architecturally.
That'd give me intuition
about why these results differ by model.
So to someone who knows these processor models,
this figure could be honest
as there may be a compelling reason to report only IPC,
ignoring the other two elements
of execution time and performance.
To an expert,
this figure could be both honest and accessible
depending on their use.
Notice I said depending on their use.
If the goal of the figure
was to show me the IPCs by processor model,
this works great.
But as an expert, I might want a more complex figure
which helps to explain
why the x23i has such higher IPC than the others.
So this figure fails
if the intent to is not only report IPC
but to also explain why we found these differences.
Of course, that might be a separate figure,
or it could just be part of the knowledge
of how these processors or models differ.
But for someone not in computer architecture,
this graph means virtually nothing.
You don't know what these models of processors are,
so you don't know why they may perform differently.
You likely don't know what IPC is
or even what SPEC 2006 is.
So for a non-expert, this figure is clearly not accessible.
It's unreadable.
It has no relevance to them.
And if a viewer doesn't know
that IPC is just one component of performance,
this could be unintentionally misleading.
So the two main things I'd stress
are to know your audience
and how they perceive the information.
Understand what they understand,
and know how they might interpret the result.
Also be sure to know
what the purpose is of your visualization.
Are you exploring the data?
Or presenting it?
That helps you craft it in the appropriate way.
One last point.
Take into account the expected time
for the audience to read and understand the result.
That depends on whether
this is a slide you might show
for one minute at a presentation
or a figure that you're sharing with a colleague
who might spend some time really diving into it.
These questions about your audience
and how the visualization will be used
allow you to craft it appropriately to make it accessible.
What do you think of when you hear the word elegant?
You might think about style or grace.
You might think about something clear
and aesthetically beautiful.
These all reasonably apply to good data visualizations.
I would note that in practice,
I put a lot more time into elegant visualizations
when I'm presenting results.
When I'm exploring data,
it's nice to have,
but it is no means critical.
I like to think of it this way.
If my graphic is gonna be
front and center on the New York Times,
it better be perfect.
If it's in a slide deck for teaching,
it should be really solid.
And if it's for me when I'm exploring the data,
it should be acceptable.
At the very least,
the lack of elegance shouldn't get in the way
of my interpreting the data.
For example,
later this week you'll be creating an overlay like this.
Take a moment to take it in.
There are elements of this which are elegant.
The use of an overlay on a map
helps an observer see the different countries quickly.
The color coding to show numeric data
helps the viewer quickly interpret results.
The color scheme goes towards darker blue
with more CO2 emissions per capita,
so that might not actually be perfect.
More CO2 emissions per capita is arguably a bad thing,
so a different color scheme
which conveys that CO2 emissions is bad
might actually be better.
There isn't unnecessary other data here.
I didn't put the numbers over each country
as that'd likely distract more than help.
I didn't try to combine with some other measure
like GDP per capita in the same figure
as it'd likely be too much to process
but might make a really nice complementary figure.
If I added any additional decorations
like maybe a smokestack on high CO2 per capita producers,
I'd be sure it added to the figure rather than detracted.
But this figure,
I thought it actually detracted more than it added
so I left it off.
Overall, style and beauty is subjective,
but I think when we look into our case studies
at the end of this week,
you'll be able to appreciate the elegance
of some of their designs.
We'll also give you links to websites and talks
which were exceptionally elegant visualizations as well.
For elegant visualizations,
you should focus on what is relevant
and remove anything that isn't adding to the figure.
You're trying to make the design invisible
so that the viewer can take
as much from the visualization as possible
without being distracted.
Now this isn't the same thing as minimalism,
but I've heard some folks argue for.
I feel minimalism doesn't just remove the unnecessary
but often starts remove things which are helpful.
So there's a balance to be struck with how much to include.
Think about your style.
For those of your who read Nate Silver's website, 538,
you know there's a distinct style
to his presentations and graphs.
To me, I really like that style,
and his website's success, I think,
is likely tied at least in part
to how recognizable his style is and presentation.
Decorations may seems contrary to honesty,
and, in some cases, they kinda are.
In scientific papers about blood donations,
I'd be surprised to see the bars in bar chart
intentionally made to resemble flowing blood.
But if the graphic is put out by a charity
encouraging folks to give blood the week before Halloween,
decorations may bring the visualization extra attention.
And this just goes back to knowing your intended audience.
If this were a data visualization course in a design lab,
we could have spent much of the course
just on exploring these principles in depth.
Our hope with this course
is to just give you some concrete goals
that you can aspire toward
when you're creating your visualizations.