- In this lesson we'll be focused on Matplotlib.
So by the end of this video,
you should be able to explain the role
that Matplotlib has in data science.
Matplotlib is a widely used plotting library for Python.
It's often my go-to for creating quick plots of data
and almost all the plots I showed you in the last lesson
were made just using Matplotlib.
I value Matplotlib because it's easy
to produce quick plots of data
when I'm doing data exploration
and because I find the plots clean
and generally aesthetically pleasing.
I actually really like this phrase
from the Matplotlib homepage.
The first part, make easy things easy,
is what I was referring to when I said
it's my go-to for most plots during data exploration.
You can produce a bar chart, a line chart,
a scatter plot, a box plot or histogram
in just a few lines of code.
This is fantastic as you can quickly check
the relationship between features,
plot trend lines, or just get a better feel
for the distribution of data.
The second part is why you'll find yourself
often using Matplotlib even when
you create complex visualizations,
where you want it to customize your plots
for presenting your results.
One of my favorite stories about Matplotlib
is that a colleague of mine took the time
to set up scripts for the figures
in a journal paper that we published.
The setup took a bit of time, as he wanted
to have an elegant design, and he wanted
the fonts to mesh seemingly with the paper text.
If you've read research papers,
you'll undoubtedly have seen a figure
which just stands out from the paper in a bad way.
One reason why figures stand out in this way
is that all the fonts are completely different
in the figure from the paper.
Another reason is that if you're using LaTeX
for your paper, the figure may seem
less elegant than the paper.
So his work aimed to remedy these common problems.
And what was so great about his work
was that because it relied on Python scripts
reading CSV files and Matplotlib,
we build the scripts into the building
of the paper using a make file.
So we'd update the CSV with some new results,
we'd hit build, and we'd get an updated paper
with these really clean figures.
And all of this is made possible by Matplotlib.
In the larger context of Jupyter notebooks
and the landscape of Python tools,
you may know that Python is a,
that Matplotlib is a fairly low-level tool for plotting.
There are a ton of other tools out there,
including Seaborn, ggplot, Altair,
Bokeh, Plotly, and Folium, among many others.
For us, we use a library that fits
our visualization needs best, based on those needs.
So we'll have a reading later in this lesson
which outlines when you might wanna use
one library versus another.
And we'll keep updating this as new libraries come out,
or as libraries add new features.
Given that there are so many libraries out there,
and we so frequently work with Matplotlib
in our everyday work, we'll start by
diving into a notebook showcasing Matplotlib.
Then we'll have a short notebook later
showing you how to work with more advanced libraries.