- Before we dive into visualizations,
remember that I said visualizations
have little to no meaning without a context.
So this week, we'll get started working
with the World Development Indicators Dataset
which is an open dataset on Kaggle.
This is just a slightly modified version
from the dataset that's actually available
from the World Bank.
So at the end of this video,
you should be able to use
the World Development Indicators Dataset
to conduct data science.
The first step with any dataset
is to perform an initial exploration.
So first, let's import pandas, numpy, random,
and matplotlib.pyplot.
Next, let's read in the csv file
into a pandas data frame
and display the shape of the data.
For this to work for you,
be sure that you've downloaded the dataset
and placed it in the appropriate directory.
So it's a big dataset
and reading it may take some time.
In fact, the dataset has 5.6 million rows
and six columns.
So let's now use the head method
to see where these columns hold.
Interesting.
So we've got the name of the country,
the code for the country,
the name of an indicator,
an indicator code,
a year and a value.
So this is actually a four-dimensional dataset
where the dimensions are country,
indicator, year and value.
Looking at these indicators,
I'm already seeing some really interesting things here.
As someone who's environmentally conscientious,
I'm pretty curious about that CO2 emissions per capita.
We'll actually use that metric a bit later.
I'm also curious
how many countries are in this dataset.
I can test that by using the unique method
on a column of the data frame
to find out how many unique entries are in the column.
Looks like we've got about 247 countries.
I'd like to do a quick sanity check on the data.
If we've got 247 countries,
we should have 247 country codes.
And we do.
I'd also like to know how many indicators we have.
Wow 1,344 is a pretty extensive list of indicators.
You know if you wanted to explore a full list
of the indicators themselves and more details about them,
we have a link for that at the top of this notebook.
All right, so we know how many countries
and how many indicators,
now we need to know how many years of data we have.
So 56 years is a pretty good time frame
for data collection.
Let's see what this time frame is.
Ah 1960 through 2015,
great.
At this point we feel like we've
a pretty good feel for the dataset.
We have various indicators per country
over the time span of 1960 to 2015.
In the next video,
we'll continue to explore the data
using visualizations in matplotlib.